---
title: "6 things I learned being a Data Scientist in the U.S.A"
layout: post
date: 2000-01-01
tags: announcement
---

# 6 things I learned being a Data Scientist in the U.S.A

**1. Plethora of jobs**

There will be a shortage of 140,000 to 190,000 data science jobs this year in
the US alone! So you are lucky if you chose to be in data science but…..

**2. Finding a job is a job**

Finding work straight out of college is tough and sadly it never gets easier.
Also, it does not help that employers have unreasonable expectations from
candidates. Most entry level jobs require prior work experience (talk about
catch-22) and some positions require 10–15 years of work experience in a
technology that is less than 3 years old!

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*jr7fkljAX2SC-IIFqcBXBw.jpeg)

I see job postings like these all the time:

> Company X is looking to hire a “Deep Learning Engineer” with 10–15 years of
> experience in Tensorflow, Keras and Theano…..etc.

Ahem….Tensorflow was first made public in **2015!**

**3. Certification means competence**

If you work in Hadoop, become a Hadoop Developer and get a certification. If you
work in BI try to get certified in Tableau. If you make AI models, enroll in a
data science certification track. Certifications matter to recruiters and this
will differentiate you from the pack.

**4. Learn by doing**

*Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day; teach a man and* **you get my
point!** In all my years on this blue dot, I have learned the most when I code
myself or use a software myself. So stop reading theory and start practical
work. You can always use Stack Overflow when you get stuck.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*t7I9YgVPHSVUIFQJwMR5pg.jpeg)

**5. Buzz words are impressive**

Yes, sadly we are inundated with buzz words all the time. A few years ago it was
all about the “Cloud”, then it was “IoT”, then came “Machine Learning” and these
days its “Deep Learning”. Although buzz words do become monotonous you will have
to use them to communicate with your non-technical clients.

**6. Be patient be optimistic**

Not trying to be too philosophical, but things will get tough. You will get
passed on that coveted promotion. You will not receive the increment you were
promised. The work will get repetitive and boring. The customer will drive you
completely bonkers. You will have a nervous breakdown (that's a coin-flip so
chances are 50–50!). And yes you may get fired , if you work in the industry
long enough.

So buckle up and remember life is a journey , there is no destination. Take it
on the chin, fall on your ass, and get right up. If you do get depressed, don't
try to be brave, go find professional help.
