---
title: "Are UFO's Extraterrestrial? : A Scientific Inquiry"
layout: post
date: 2019-01-01
tags: ufo
active: blog
---

### Part I: Extraordinary Claims Require Extraordinary Evidence

When people first hear or read the word UFO (unidentified flying object) they instinctively think ALIENS! Ok let's back up a bit.

A UFO can be of two origins either:

1. Earthly origin or Terrestrial
2. Extraterrestrial origin

The idea of alien life does not seem far fetched. The universe as we know today is around 13.8 billion years old. As the observable universe is constantly expanding the distance to the edge is about 46 billion light years. I dont know know if your brain hurts like mine reading it but the distances are simply too vast for us to comprehend. And within the vastness of the cosmos are billions of galaxies, solar systems and planets like our own.

The notion that life evolved from single cellular goo into technological sentient bipedal apes on just one planet (in the entire universe) is not only hubristic by down right improbable.

The Drake’s equation, a probability equation of calculating intelligent life, informs us that us being alone is simply impossible.

Even if most life does not pass the great filter (a test civilisation needs to pass before interstellar travel), it is still rational to assume that a dozen civilisations should have passed the test. If a civilisation passes the test, it also rational to assume they have an interest in exploring the universe.

Now that we have established that we should not be alone in the universe, just like we were not at the center of it, lets find out if we have been visited.

*****

### Part II: Hello Where Are The Scientists?

The UFO debate like any interesting narrative attracts a large diaspora of people; scientists, skeptics, believers, conspiracy theorists, debunkers and bat-shit crazies.

In my research the people with credibility are few and far between. The two individuals which I have studied extensively are; Dr. J. Allen Hynek of Project Sign, Grudge and Blue Book and his protege Dr. Jacques Vallée. Both individuals spent a lifetime studying, documenting and analysing reports. Both individuals make a strong case for the UFO phenomenon. Their literature is a required reading for the subject matter.

*****

### Part III: The 4 Pillars of Ufology

Although there are hundreds and thousands of reports and events, for brevity’s sake lets break down the phenomenon into 4 subcategories:

1. Roswell Incident Of 1947

2. Area 51

3. Historical Sightings

4. Modern Sightings 

Lets dive deeper into these 4 subcategories:

#### Roswell Incident Of 1947

The Roswell incident of 1947 was the hyperbole big bang of the UFO phenomenon. The story goes that a flying saucer with alien beings crashed near Roswell, New Mexico in 1947. The conspiracy of Roswell cover-up emanated from the headline by the local newspaper (Roswell Daily Record) which read “RAAF Captures Flying Saucer On Ranch In Roswell Region”. This news clipping opened the pandora’s box of retrieved flying saucer and alien beings by the U.S. Air Force. 

The U.S. Air Force officially stated that a weather balloon had crashed from the, then classified Project Mogul, where high-altitude balloons were being used to detect radiation from nuclear bombs by the Soviets. 

So which is more likely? 

That an alien spaceship capable of traveling millions of light years, bending space-time and God knows what tomfoolery, crashed at its destination or that a spy balloon from a top secret project had technical failures and fell near some dude’s ranch?

If it is the former, then the aliens who crashed near Roswell were either drunk or high on some real potent s**t.

The aliens crashing on some poor farmer’s ranch would be similar to an airplane crashing near an ape colony in Congo. Atleast we would recover the wreckage and god forbid dead bodies or survivors than have the apes have a field day.

#### Area 51

Area 51 is a top secret military base in Nevada adjacent to Groom Lake. It has become the Mecca of ufologists since the infamous Bob Lazar came forward in 1989 with the allegation that alien aircrafts were being back engineered there. Lazar doesn’t carry much credibility as he lied about his education at Caltech and MIT. Still there is a high probability he worked at the base not as a physicist (as he claims) but more as a technician like he did at Los Alamos.

Since WWII, Area 51 has been widely known as the testing grounds for cutting edge U.S. Air Force aerospace technology. The U.S. Air Force might be working on disc-shaped fighter, stealth or experimental aircraft. Hell, the Nazis were making disc shaped flying machines and Project Paperclip recruited the same scientists to the then top secret U.S. Space Program. So, it’s not far fetched to assume that the U.S. Air Force has since made significant breakthroughs in the not-so-secret Nazi flying-saucer project.

We all know how easily nuclear technology disseminated and or proliferated from the U.S. to Soviet Union and the rest of the world. So a disinformation campaign would actually be in the national interest of the U.S. government. The U.S. government would much rather prefer the world believe it has alien spaceships than ultra-high-speed-evasive aircraft.

#### Historical Sightings

I have read the works of Jacques Vallée with great detail because his approach to the UFO phenomenon has been the most scientific of all the researchers to date. His take on the phenomenon is multifaceted but his main thesis is that at the heart of the matter, we are dealing with a a sociological phenomenon as much as a physical one. 

If you've read Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind by historian Yuval Noah Harari, its underlying thesis, is some-what similar; the success of our species predicated on our ability to organise and cooperate via abstract sociological narratives. 

Dr. Vallée purports that our belief in UFO’s is similar to past held beliefs in the paranormal (ghosts, fairies, demons, Jinns) and that the phenomenon predominantly reveals itself with the perpetuating beliefs of the era.

Where I disagree which Dr. Vallée is his insistence on the existence of this phenomenon. He believes it is intelligent, trickster in nature and that it deceives us of its true nature and motives. 

There are three reason I disagree with Dr. Vallée.

1. The power of human imagination i.e. persistent belief in myths and ideologies thousands of years old
2. The hallucinatory nature of the brain, manifested through mental disorders like schizophrenia
3. The potency of psychoactive drugs found in nature like ayahuasca, psilocybin and cannabis

Yet, I am open to the idea of an other worldly presence amongst us interplanetary, intergalactic, interdimensional or unexplained.

But even if the phenomenon is real, there is no way of measuring it and because the phenomenon is unfalsifiable, it is therefore, unscientific - by our latest scientific methods.

#### Modern Sightings

To be fair in recent times there have been hundreds of sightings reported by fighter pilots, commercial airline pilots, air-traffic controllers and radar technicians. As ridicule and reputation go hand-in-hand with the UFO subject, the sheer number of reports by these experts would imply something strange is flying in the air. Even if we dismiss across the board, 99% of the reports, the remaining 1% would imply; unidentifiable activity by people who are paid to identify it.

*****

### Conclusion

It is my opinion that the UFO phenomenon is worth researching. It is highly probable that the U.S. Government possess proprietary aerospace technology which at its core, not just state-of-the-art but truly revolutionary. Does the technology use gravity? Maybe, maybe not. But anything which flies faster than an F-18 would imply an understanding of physics which mainstream science is unaware of. This fact, however does leave me skeptical of U.S. Air Force possessing such technology. However, the U.S. Government spends more money on black budget classified projects than any nation on Earth. So using exotic technology by employing world class scientists with limitless budget is not outside the realm of possibility. The surest way to keep the technology hidden would be, either deny its existence or use disinformation tactics and call it other worldly.

But can I be wrong, and can UFO’s be in fact extraterrestrial? 

Yes, as a scientist I have to be open to that possibility. 

If its truly extraterrestrial then be rest assured no one has the answers - no cabal, no shadowy organisation, not even the bigwigs at the Pentagon; as Arthur C Clarke famously said: “Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.” And if there are aliens we might as well call them magicians.
