---
title: "Rat in a cage"
layout: page
date: 2018-11-26
tags: announcement
comments: true
active: blog
---

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2560/1*KsfXKi62141TUtl8WDpDbg.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack"></span>

In modern society, the proletariat is born for the cubicle. Our education system
runs like an indoctrination factory; stifling creativity and conforming
free-spirited children into fearful, command abiding, corporate robots who are
taught subservience over sovereignty. In naked capitalism, the corporate machine
is a soulless enterprise. The machine does not know you nor does it want to know
you. Its chief concern is to maximize its bottom line. If you cannot contribute
to its objective you better find another master or improve your skills to be
worthy of your current one. The machine does not honor anything except a pay
check and a promotion provided you jump through enough hoops and faithfully tow
the company line. Corporations fail to realize that humans are not robots. We
get depressed, anxious and demotivated. The corporation minimizes dissidence by
swiftly replacing one worker for the other. Each year, the corporation purges
its bottom performers. The threat of lay-off keep the employees in the jaws of
debilitating anxiety.

From the top to the bottom every person in an organization is replaceable. The
corporation is a concrete jungle; the dominant thrive while the meek strive to
survive. This Darwinian ‘survival of the fittest’ philosophy encourages
workplace politics and rewards Machiavellian behavior. It is no surprise that
sociopaths tend to rise to the top of most corporations. The rule of capitalism
is simple; either you conform to the system or the system spits you out. There
is no middle ground. Ironically, the biggest supporters of capitalism are the
cubicle-dwellers. It is human nature to believe in myths rather than be
confronted by harsh realities. The reality is that spending the majority of your
life in a windowless-box surrounded by artificial plants and light is not
conducive for the human spirit.

Man loves order, craves for it and despises chaos. Man will go to any length to
establish order, even at the cost of his own independence. Corporations provides
illusionary comfort in the form of a steady pay check. In exchange, it robs you
off your time. Life is simply borrowed time. Financial freedom is a worthy
endeavor for most of us, but the route to financial freedom seldom comes from
cubicle work. Most jobs pay just enough to keep you working but not enough to
keep you motivated. A growing population, wealth inequality and the rising cost
of urban living has made asset creation a hopeless dream for most of us. Gone
are the days, where you could retire by the age of 60 and set sail into the
proverbial sunset. Today, if you are not clever with financial planning, you
will probably work till your last breath. The 40-hour work week is also another
convenient lie. The reality of the 9 to 5 job is that it is not 9 to 5.
Sleeping, commuting, meal prep and getting ready for work accounts for atleast
12 hours each day. In the end, we are left with only 4 hours of our personal
time. This 4 hours of personal time is typically drowned in some leisurely
activity to keep us from realizing the mundane reality of our lives. Every year
the 2 weeks of promised vacation is an escape from the drudgery of modern day
work. Every weekend is seen as an escape from the misery of one’s existence. It
is not Mondays’ that suck, its your job.

The majority of workers are trapped in a cubicle which ironically resembles a
rat maze. A rat maze for the rat race. Some may escape the cubicle and get a
corner office with a view. A rat cage with a view. Can everyone escape this
prison? No. Frankly speaking for the masses, reality is and always will be
confounding. People would rather be tied to a monotonous and safe existence,
rather than take risks, be honest with themselves and pursue what they really
enjoy. “The corporation is the most efficient system to propel the economic
turbines of our society.” We as a society have accepted this proposition as an
irrefutable fact. Capitalism realized that the best kind of slavery is voluntary
slavery. Trick a person in believing he is not a slave whilst achieving
voluntary dependence. Pay him enough money that he can survive but not enough
that he can quit.

Like bonded labor, debt and the lack of monetary freedom or safety net keeps the
worker perpetually tied to the system. They say the average person has less than
3 months of savings to live off on. This fact is abysmal to say the least. A
hundred years from now we might look back at capitalism and simply shake our
collective heads. How could we sacrifice the best years of our life, helping
others achieve outcomes divorced from our own realities?

