---
title: "Can you see your entire life from a higherdDimension?"
layout: post
date: 2019-01-01
tags: announcement
---



![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2560/1*N85BFqgZkHZee5bWT1XN1w.jpeg)

### Einstein’s Theory of General Relativity

Einstein’s theory of general relativity explained gravitational force or gravity
and how it arises from the curvature of space-time from an uneven distribution
of mass.

*Note: Space-time is combination of 3+1 dimensions (3 space + 1 temporal
dimension)*

From this theory we understood everything from the motion of galaxies, our
workings of our solar system, expansion of space and nature of black holes.

But there was one drawback, general relativity could not explain phenomena which
happened at the quantum scale.

*****

### Enter the Standard Model

The standard model in particle physics explains three of the* *four* *known
fundamental forces *(excluding gravity)* in the universe which includes
electromagnetism and weak and strong nuclear forces. It has allowed us to find
quarks, higgs boson and neutrinos which is further demystifying the secrets of
the quantum world.

*****

### **The Elusive Theory of Everything**

Today, scientists are working to integrate general relativity and the standard
model in a unified all encompassing theory know as the “Theory of Everything” or
“Unified Field Theory”. This theory will explain physics at a large stage (think
galaxies and solar systems) and quantum states seamlessly. An elegant equation
describing all the pyhsical forces in the universe.

*****

### The Need for Higher Dimensions

Surprisingly in order to incorporate these four fundamental forces together
*(gravitational, electromagnetic, strong nuclear, and weak nuclear)* the
equations seem to be only solved once we go higher from the 4th dimension.

In 1993 physicist Gerard ‘t Hooft postulated the [“Hologrpahic
Principle”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holographic_principle) stating,
*“Information about an extra dimension is visible as a curvature in a spacetime
with one fewer dimension”. *For instance a hologram is a 3D picture placed on a
2D surface which gives illusion of curvature when an observer changes his
viewpoint. Similarly, Hooft belives that fabric of space-time is really
5-dimensional.

Mathematician Theodor Kaluza and Swedish physicist Oskar Klein proposed the
[Kaluza–Klein theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KaluzaâKlein_theory) in
1921 which suggested the possibility of a fifth dimension where electromagnetism
and gravity could be unified.

Although the Kaluza–Klein theory fell out of favor with physicts in the 20th
century it was revived by the emergence of string theory.

*****

### Enter Quantum Mechanics

String theory states that the fundmanetal blocks of nature are nothing but
vibrating strings of energy. Mathematically for this to work 10 or more
dimensions need to exist. In theoretical physics according to string theory
(type I, IIA, IIB, HO, HE) there are 10-dimensions.

M-theory which which proposes energetic “branes” mathematically needs
11-dimensions to work.

While Bosonic theory (type closed, open) mathematically requires 26-dimensions.

As of now these are just hypotheses but scientists at the the
particle-accelerator Large Hadron Collider (LHC) are conducting experiments to
prove if there are indeed higher dimensions.

*****

### **What Would Higher Dimensions Look Like?**

**By adding a right-angle to a dimension you create a new dimension. Each new
dimension is orthogonal to the previous direction.**

**Dimension-1: **The first dimension is length, a straight-line is a perfect
example.

**Dimension-2:** Simply add a right-angle to your line and now you have height.
A good example is a circle, square or triangle.

**Dimension-3: **Add another right-angle and you will add depth to the square or
triangle. Now we have a sphere, cube or pyramid.

**Dimension-4: **The fourth dimension is a direction in 3-dimensional space.
Simply known as Time. A tesseract or hypercube is an example of a 4-dimensional
object unfortunately we cannot create or visualize it in our 3D space.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*LGj_1Srkl74hXtlCyR2MDQ.gif)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Closest representation of a tesseract</span>

**Dimension-5: **So what is orthogonal to Time? This where things get
interesting. In the 5th dimension we would call time “Imaginary Time”. Stephen
Hawking explains this in his essay [“The Beginning of
Time”](http://www.hawking.org.uk/the-beginning-of-time.html) with the following
quote:

*“It seems that Quantum theory, on the other hand, can predict how the universe
will begin. Quantum theory introduces a new idea, that of imaginary time.
Imaginary time may sound like science fiction, and it has been brought into
Doctor Who. But nevertheless, it is a genuine scientific concept. One can
picture it in the following way. One can think of ordinary, real, time as a
horizontal line. On the left, one has the past, and on the right, the future.
But there’s another kind of time in the vertical direction. This is called
imaginary time, because it is not the kind of time we normally experience. But
in a sense, it is just as real, as what we call real time.”*

Hypothetically speaking of course, if you could access the 5th dimension you
would be technically able to see the past, present and future of everyone on
Earth.

You would no longer be just a prisoner of the present moving from past to
present. Just as you can see the starting point of a straight line and the
ending point in 2D space. You would be able to see the start and end of time in
5D space.

As a 5-dimensional being you would be able to access food from people stomach
just like you can pick up a pen from a desk. Unbeknownsest to humans in the 4th
dimension you would literally be a God. Wouldn't that be cool.

But this is very unlikely. Quantum physicists believe any dimension higher that
the fourth dimension are subatomic at scale.

*****

### **Are Scientist Studying Higher Dimensions?**

Scientist now believe that all dimensions above the 4th dimension are very
compact in scale. String theorists state that these dimensions could be curled
up much smaller than a atom’s nucleus. In super-string theory this is
represented by the Calabi–Yau space.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*5IsQhhmm56zQmTd4D17fig.gif)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Calabi–Yau space</span>

Today, scientists are studying gravitational waves and light from the collision
of two neutrino stars 130 million light year ago
[(source)](https://www.ligo.org/science/Publication-S5LV_ANTARES/index.php).

When we look out in space the effect of gravity seems much weaker compared to
light.

This has led scientist to believe that light may be constrained to 4-dimensions
while gravity is leaking in these extra dimensions.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*4oxlEEl6IGl2fKfDAlG8Mw.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack"></span>

We also know that dark energy is causing accelerating expansion of our universe
and that it might be hiding in these extra dimensions of space
[(source)](https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn12261-is-dark-energy-lurking-in-hidden-spatial-dimensions/).

It might not be long before we can prove there really are extra dimensions to
our universe.

