---
title: "Pakistan: The story of a rapidly failing state"
layout: post
date: 2019-01-01
tags: announcement
---


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*tQd-mITiJDP6EuhtCXvDrg.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack"></span>

Pakistan for the uninitiated is a nuclear-nation and the fifth-largest country
in the world by population. Over 210 million people live in an area slightly
less than twice the size of California. Pakistan since its inception has been
marred with a turbulent history of dynastic family politics, military
dictatorships, debilitating feudalism, a self-serving bureaucracy, burgeoning
radicalization and a lack of social ethos verging on moral bankruptcy. Pakistan
ranks 17th on the Fragile States Index (FSI). Fragile State being just a polite
nomenclature for a** **Failed State.

*****

Pakistan’s founding father was Muhammad Ali Jinnah, a well educated
secular-Muslim lawyer of Indian Subcontinent. Jinnah envisioned Pakistan to be a
secular democracy and expressed this desire in his first Presidential Address to
the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan in August 11, 1947:

*“You are free, you are free to go to your temples, you are free to go to your
mosques or any other place of worship in this State of Pakistan. You may belong
to any religion or cast or creed — that has nothing to do with the business of
the State … Now I think we should keep that in front of us as our ideal and you
will find that in course of time Hindus would cease to be Hindus and Muslims
would cease to be Muslims, not in the religious sense, because that is the
personal faith of each individual, but in the political sense as citizens of the
State”*

But Jinnah’s dream never materialized, his secular vision was derailed by the
adoption of the Objectives Resolution in 1949. Pakistan’s biggest hurdle in
joining the developed world has been its failure to develop a societal consensus
or more aptly a social contract. The dilemma of Pakistan has been a dichotomy of
Jinnah’s progressive secular vision versus society’s maturing myopic ideological
doctrine.

In 1977, General Zia-ul-Haq executed the third successful military coup and
shortly thereafter hanged the only rival to his power prime minister Zulfikar
Ali Bhutto. A prop to consolidate power, Zia’s central reformation policy was
“Sharization”. Historically, religion has been a tried and tested tool for
rulers. In 1977, Zia implemented the Hudood Ordinances which enacted ban on
alcohol, unlawful fornication, strict blasphemy laws, profit-loss banking, Zakat
tax, Ramadan Ordinance and established the Federal Shariat Court and a Shariat
Appellate Bench on the Supreme Court. To this day the Shariah-courts run in
parallel with traditional court system, ensuring the inextricable marriage
between religion and state for all times to come.

After Zia’s power-grab, countless religious groups advocating the establishment
of ISIS-style global caliphate, expanded their foothold in Pakistan. Within 10
years, from 1977 till Zia’s death in 1988, Pakistan’s society transformed from
an Islamic state (with secular undertones) to a semi-Shariah theocracy. Pakistan
is still reeling from Zia’s policies, a culture of hypocrisy has taken deep
roots in the underbelly of society. Secular and moderate Pakistanis refuse to
criticize their radicalized peers due to a well documented track-record of
violent retribution.

However, Zia was not the sole contributor of Pakistan’s radicalized identity. In
1979, The United States of America poured in billion of dollars for Pakistan to
setup Jihadi camps for a proxy war with the Soviet Union in Afghanistan. After
the Russians were expelled from Afghanistan, Pakistan army continued to foster
Jihadi organizations against its long-time rival India but in the process
created insurmountable problems for the State.

To further compound the woes of the Muslim world, since the 70’s Saudi Arabia
has spent $100 billion dollars to export its Wahabi-Salafi-ideology in Muslim
countries like Pakistan. In 1947, there were 189 madrasas (religious schools) in
Pakistan, in 1956 around 244 and today there are over 40,000 plus madrasas all
over the country. These madrasas have been a fodder to terrorist groups within
the country. After 9/11, Pakistan Army’s own home grown Jihadi networks turned
against the state for its failure in transitioning to a fully-fledged Islamic
Caliphate. It wasn’t until Operation Zarb-e-Azb and heavy military and civilian
casualties that Pakistan recovered from pervasive home-grown terrorism. This
goes to show like fire, you can feed an ideology but never control it.

*****

It would be an exercise in naivety to think that external forces do not
manipulate the sociopolitical climate within Pakistan. But nations like
individuals, will always safeguard their national interests, it would be foolish
to think otherwise. However, it would be an exercise in self-deception, if all
of Pakistan’s failures were attributed to external actors only (as portrayed by
the media).

In order to understand the failures of Pakistan we have to first examine the
ground realities: Pakistan does not enjoy true democracy but a quasi-democracy,
as it has two centers of power; Government and Army. The perpetual tussle
between civil-military apparatus has contributed immensely to Pakistan’s
instability.

It can be argued that the third rising power-center in the country is the
Judiciary. Historically Pakistan’s Judiciary has played second-fiddle to the
government but recent corruption allegations against the siting government and
support from the Amy has caused the Judiciary to finally flex its muscles.

Pakistan Army has enjoyed power since the first military coup of Ayub Khan in
1958. Since 1958, there have been a total of four military coups. After the
ousting of Perez Musharraf in 2008, Pakistan resumed its quasi-democracy
experiment. Army still influences internal/external policies because it is the
most organized institution in the country and due to the moral bankruptcy of
Pakistani politicians. Another bane for Pakistan is corruption. Corruption runs
rampant in all segments of the Pakistani society. According to Transparency
International’s global Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) Pakistan is ranked
117th out of the total 180 countries. Corruption follows a top-down approach and
for this reason corruption has trickled down from the elites to the masses.

*****

What makes Pakistan weak is not just division between its institutions but also
its dire economic conditions. Foreign influence continues to plague internal
policies because of Pakistan’s heavy reliance on foreign aid.

Debt is modern day slavery.

As of May 2018, Pakistan’s external debt and liabilities stand at $89 billion.
At such massive debt levels and only $11 billion in foreign currency reserves
the Pak Rupee continues to devalue against the US Dollar. This makes imports
expensive and exports cheaper. However Pakistan imports more than it exports, to
be precise $30 billion more. In other words, Pakistan spends $30 billion more
than it earns. Just to pay off debts for 2018–2019 the country will further
borrow Rs 1.55 trillion from the domestic market and Rs 342.1 billion from
foreign countries. The need for payment of outstanding debts is quite
straightforward; if Pakistan does not meet its payment obligations all import
and exports will cease and the country will descent into chaos and anarchy.

Pakistan essentially runs like a Ponzi scheme, in order to survive it keeps on
borrowing to pay off the money it has already borrowed. Pakistan is collectively
owned not by its citizens but by its debtors. This ensures subservience and
placation by the Pakistan’s civil-military apparatus to US, EU and Chinese
interests. However, Pakistan’s debt woes are not its only problem. The nation is
incapable of regulating the undocumented economy (black economy) and implement
effective taxation policies.

According to Bloomberg report in 2012 , 36% of Pakistan’s economy is unregulated
which roughly equals to $100 billion. Also only 25% of the visible economy is
taxed.

*****

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*sbOLltzRKxwAkAUpKU8e1A.jpeg)

According to the International Development Committee only 0.57% of the
population file tax returns which is roughly 1.1 million out 210 million people.
IMF reports Pakistan looses Rs. 3.3 trillion or $ 2.8 billion each year in
revenue due to failure of tax collection. This robs exchequer of billions of
dollars in revenue each year which could be leveraged to pay off debts, build
foreign currency reserves and reject the need for lopsided trade deals.

*****

Pakistan is a country in the cross-hairs of myriad challenges, mostly homegrown.
Pakistan is a failing state because the interests of the powers at be are in
direct conflict with the interests of the nation. In Pakistan the military tends
to perpetuate power and the civilian government tends to amass wealth in their
political term rather than solve Pakistan’s systemic socioeconomic issues.
Pakistani politicians are essentially businessman disguised as political
leaders.

Hypocrisy is the glue that binds morally bankrupt societies and Pakistan is no
exception. Pakistan is a rapidly failing state and its failures are entirely its
own.


