---
title: "Choose your ideology wisely"
layout: post
date: 2019-01-01
tags: ideology, religion
---

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1000/1*f0cywETax4FT8y6jOvGDHg.jpeg)

The acquisition of language has been a mystery to linguists as no direct
empirical evidence has yet been discovered. Language supersedes all primitive
forms of oral communication as it distills thoughts and ideas in the most
effective manner. Collected knowledge has been historically dispended down
through generations in the form of stories, analogies, tales and fables. This
rich oral tradition, its oldest embodiment is preserved in writing of *The Epic
of Gilgamesh* a story of a Sumerian King of Mesopotamia - the first civilization
formed in 4000 B.C. Once language could be recorded in writing, the diffusion of
ideas was perfected. Writing facilitated a collection of ideas to be converted
into a system which could be disseminated, practiced and enforced by the members
of that particular society.

This system is known as an ideology â€” a collection of ideas. In order to
perpetuate an ideology, the followers have to believe in its tenets. For
adoption purposes, the believers would later embed their ideology into laws. The
law, in turn, would carry a penalty for anyone who would oppose or desecrate the
ideology. Laws have become the cornerstone of modern society because it allows
believers to control society. Laws also keep the ideology from evolving into
better versions.

Throughout human history, ideologies have been instrumental in evolving and
reforming the social, economic and political fabric of societies. In fact, it
can be said that every major social movement was reformed and improved upon an
existing idea revered by its followers. Slowly the new idea, if worthy, would
gain traction and attract a new loyal and ardent following. The old ideology
would slowly transmute into a newer version or would be replaced, either
peacefully or violently. This has been a rinse-and-repeat cycle historically for
all major movements.

However, the problem with ideology is that if it does not evolve with time, it
becomes detrimental to human progress. The impediment to the ineveitable
evolution of an ideology is law. Once, an ideology becomes law which governs
human behaviour; the law extols stiff penalties from anyone who abrogates it.
This cost to the inhabitants, dissuades them from improving the ideology. The
cost can be justified via natural human or providential law. Ideologies,
especially divinely sanctioned, extoll the harshest penalties from its
followers. However, an ideology can not retain its influence on society for
eternity. Historically, all previous ideologies have been replaced by newer
ones; this much is inevitable. The litmus test of a devolving ideology is the
inability to criticise it publicy. If we cannot critique an ideology, it can
never be inherently moral. Any ideology immune from critque is essentially
dogma.

Since birth, we are conditioned by society to focus on the benefits of the
prevailing ideology and dispel any logical errors. Most ideologies ostracize and
marginalize any dissidents of the said ideology. Violence is either encouraged
or tolerated by the majority of its followers. As a specie we need to stop
idealizing, venerating and defining ourselves by our ideologies. Our moral
responsibility is to constantly refine, improve and evolve our beliefs. If an
ideology becomes dogmatic, its downside can be catastrophic and may even wipe
out our species. Evolution is the law of nature, and what does not evolve, dies
or is simply replaced.


