---
title: "Whe we stress"
layout: post
date: 2019-01-01
tags: why
---

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*5N_mfapUzb8UkzQJod2RTQ.png)

Einstein famously said: *“Adversity introduces man to himself.”*

I couldn’t agree more. But is there a way we can introduce us to ourselves
before adversity inadvertently does?

*****

Every person can be reduced to a basic set of actions or behaviors which govern
a code of conduct. This code of conduct is predicated on a principle of how a
person views his or her life.

The way a person approaches life is the foundation on which the person’s
character is built. Every behavior or action can be traced back to this
foundation. We can predict our behavior with great accuracy when we succumb to
mundane daily stressors. A small predictable stressor will only shake the
structure but will not reveal any structural weaknesses. But an acute unexpected
stressor will change all that.

Only in the presence of an acute unpredictable stressor, will we react in a
manner unbeknownst to us. An unpredictable stressor is like a strong earthquake
that exposes the foundation over which our personality rests on. The good thing
is that we can change the foundations whenever we like.

When an acute stressor is thrust upon our psyche it derives a reaction congruent
with our beliefs.

If you ponder over past situations where you wish you had reacted differently
try to uncover the state of mind you were in. More likely than not, your action
was predicated on a particular set of outcome you wanted. That particular
outcome allowed you to say or do something which you regret. Behind every regret
is a reason which masks our behavior.

If you understand the principle the foundation of your personality is built on;
no matter the severity of the stressor, you will always react in congruence with
your beliefs.

In conclusion, we need to change our perception of stress. Stress is
uncomfortable and painful but it also possess the power to reveal our true
nature.
