---
title: "Why Are We Hypocrites?"
layout: post
date: 2019-01-01
tags: why
---

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*PXdqpxHInn96ZjHEUVhZWg.png)

### What is Hypocrisy?

> Hypocrisy is a “double standard”; a behavior or action which is acceptable when
> you perform it but unacceptable when performed by someone else.

Hypocrisy is another term for “self delusion”. Hypocrites are like actors or
performers. The term hypocrite is derived from the Greek word *hypokrisis*,
which means, “play-acting” or “acting out”. Hypocrites will perform this self
delusion or cognitive dissonance, either knowingly or unknowingly. If the action
is performed knowingly, it is to signal a double standard to society. If the
action is performed unknowingly, it is to preserve a dishonest self image.

Hypocrisy manifests when we refuse to hold ourselves accountable by the same
standard we use for others. The reason hypocrisy is so rampant is due to the
lack of a “cognitive mirror”. A mirror is an physical object which provides an
accurate assessment of our physical appearance. But no mirror exists for our
cognitive appearance.

The only way to uncover our own hypocrisy is through an honest and objective
introspection or self examination. Self reflection is extremely hard to do for
the very reason it is uncomfortable. Self reflection is a critique of our ego
which we have carefully constructed to shield ourselves from hostile
psychological intrusions. Ego is a armor which is easy to put on but hard to put
away. Thus, greater an ego of a person, lesser the propensity they possess for
an honest and objective self examination.

From a macro picture, the more judgemental a society, the greater number of
hypocrites it will produce. Statistically speaking, inhabitants of judgemental
societies will produce hypocrites faster than non-judgmental societies will
produce individuals with integrity.

In conclusion, hypocrisy is rampant in all societies across the world. Maybe in
the future we can construct a mirror to view our thoughts like we view our
faces. And maybe then, we will finally be able to look at our own hypocrisies.


